# Notes on adding the Contextual Program Control to nodejs V8

*This describes my investigation into adding CPC into the V8 engine.  The
final implementation avoided touching V8, and instead added a new bindable
module to node that ties into the `Environment.AddPromiseHook` method.
This document is left here for historical purposes.*

The addition of the Contextual Program Control should be done at the V8 level,
as that's where the call control happens.  V8 already contains a parallel
`context` stack per `isolate`, which contains an extension object.

After investigations, it turns out that the better implementation avoids
injecting the CPC into the v8 engine.  Instead, the priority was made to
detect the current execution context - the currently running promise object
(or the parent of said execution chain), or the current thread.


## Function Execution

Functions are called through the `Isolate` class, which itself calls the
`Execution` class (for methods `Call`, `New`, and `TryCall`, all of which
filter into the private `Invoke` function).

Now, the `Isolate` class includes the before and after call callbacks (of
type `BeforeCallEnteredCallback` and `CallCompletedCallback`).  This could be
a slightly higher level entry method, but unfortunately does not allow the
function retry logic.  Additionally, they are passed the `Isolate` object, so
argument data will be lost.

Interestingly, the `api.cc` call `CompileFunctionInContext` and `CallAsFunction`
directly invoke the `Execution` class.  Several other  methods also make this
call, or call into `NewInstance` on `Execution`.

Therefore, it looks like the `Execution` `Invoke` method is the right place
to insert our logic, as it's the eventual landing pad for all the JS
function calls.


## Storage

### Context

The control could be associated with the `FunctionContext` as
extension data.  The other V8 contexts (script, module, catch, block, with, and
global) do not have the right level of information.  Note that global context
may be the right place to add initialization for the CPC.

The V8 context is just a handy wrapper around a `FixedArray`, and so each
context has a series of "slots" (array indicies) for storing fields.
Alternatively the control data could be stored in an "extension object".
Unfortunately, the context is a FixedArray, which means that it has no
memory management for its associated values.  It can't just assign new values
to its indicies and hope that C++ will correctly free that memory, or that
references to objects that might get GC'd will just work right.  This will
lead to too many headaches.

Instead, the context segment data will be associated with the JSFunction
itself.  That eliminates a need to create new native functions to access those
values.  With this technique, the context searches up through the context chain
JSFunction objects ("closure" in the code) to collect the total context
data.

Alternatively, the isolate's ThreadLocalTop could store the current
concatenated segment context data.  See `Isolate::PushPromise` for an example
where JS data is created and added to that data structure.


## Defining Segment Controllers

Segment controllers need to be definable as JS code.  This implies storing them
as a JSObject or JSFunction in whatever storage solution is used.

The controllers, for now, are stored globally, in the `JSGlobalObject`.  These
need to be protected, though, so that scripts cannot directly access them.
Special functions need to be created to manage the values.

If special handling is added to have context controllers skip the controller
check, then care must be taken to ensure that registered controllers are
registered with a private version of the function (perhaps a function wrapper).
This way, nothing can circumvent the protections by calling a controller
directly.


### Recursion Problem

The segment controllers, themselves being callable JS code, would then be
subject to context execution, which could cause infinite loops.

This is being avoided by separating out the `Invoke` call into a separate,
`InnerInvoke` call which does the normal JS function call.  The new
`Invoke` method introduces the wrappers which themselves call `InnerInvoke`.

This should still work as expected, because the new CPC logic only skips the
invocation checks to the outer controller method.  However, if the controller
itself invokes something, then we could be looking at recursion.  The final
method itself which is invoked by the controllers needs to mark the state
in the context as being in the CPC controllers or in the invoked function.

This needs to be done with care, though.  If mis-handled, then CPC controllers
can do whatever they want outside of invoking the function, without any
checks.  It may be better to mark the CPC controller functions as special,
so they avoid the checks (call directly into `InnerInvoke`), and any invocation
they do will go through the checks.

The `Isolate` will be used to store a "stack" of CPC controller calls.  Some
techniques for simplifying the stack were attempted, such as reusing the
initial function pointer as the passed-in function to the controllers, and
dynamically replacing that with the next controller (or the actual function,
if no more controllers need to be called).  However, these all lead to states
with problems.  One was where the controller calls another function
which then calls the function-under consideration (which would require checking
through the entire stack of context for matches, and has a problem where the
function could be called a second time with different arguments, thus possibly
by-passing some security issues).  Additionally, this adds overhead for every
function call, regardless of the need for a context check.


## General Implementation

The JS code manages the population of the JS Object attached to the JS Function
keyed on `$segments`.  This JS Object contains keys for each segment name.

The `JSGlobalObject` (TBD maybe this is directly stored in the Isolate?)


## Source Notes

* `Context` class
  * Defined in:
    * `deps/v8/src/contexts.h`
    * `deps/v8/src/contexts.cc`
  * "JSFunctions are pairs (context, function code), sometimes also called
    closures. A Context object is used to represent function contexts and
    dynamically pushed 'with' contexts (or 'scopes' in ECMA-262 speak)."
  * "An "extension object" is used to dynamically extend a context with
    additional variables, namely in the implementation of the 'with' construct
    and the 'eval' construct.  For instance, Context::Lookup also searches the
    extension object for properties.  (Storing the extension object is the
    original purpose of this context slot, hence the name.)"
  * However, the context object also contains "slots" for data such as
    "THROWN_OBJECT_INDEX".  Still, that's probably not the appropriate place
    for it.
  * Additionally, the Context class (nor the HeapObject its descended from)
    have a destructor.  This implicitly means that any data referenced from
    within a Context instance is not owned by the Context.  Therefore, the
    actual storage of data must be done in an object that follows the standard
    JS GC scheme.
* `Isolate` class
  * Defined in
    * `deps/v8/src/isolate.h`
    * `deps/v8/src/isolate-inl.h` (inline implementations)
    * `deps/v8/src/isolate.cc`
* `Execution` class
  * defined in
    * `deps/v8/src/execution.h`
    * `deps/v8/src/execution.cc`
* `CallDepthScope` class
  * defined in
    * `deps/v8/src/api.cc`
  * This is where the `BeforeCallEnteredCallback` and `CallCompletedCallback`
    calls are made.
* `Factory` class
  * defined in
    * `deps/v8/src/factory.h`
    * `deps/v8/src/factory.cc`
  * Creates objects, including new contexts.
* `JSGlobalObject` class
  * defined in
    * `deps/v8/src/objects.h`
    * `deps/v8/src/objects.cc`
  * Stores the global dictionary
    * defined in
      * `deps/v8/src/objects/dictionary.h`
      * `deps/v8/src/objects/dictionary.cc`
* `deps/v8/src/bootstrapper.cc`
  * Sets up the built-in functions, objects, and constants.
* Adding fields to a JSObject
  * See `deps/v8/src/api.cc`, function `NewFrameObject`
